draft-kazuho-protected-sni.md, before:

---
title: TLS Extensions for Protecting SNI
abbrev: Protected SNI
docname: draft-kazuho-protected-sni-latest
date: 2017
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup:
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, docindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 -
    ins: K. Oku
    name: Kazuho Oku
    email: kazuhooku@gmail.com

normative:
  RFC1035:
  RFC2119:
  RFC5280:
  RFC5869:
  RFC6066:

informative:
  RFC6797:
  RFC6961:
  RFC7924:

--- abstract

This memo introduces TLS extensions and a DNS Resource Record Type that can be used to protect attackers from obtaining the value of the Server Name Indication extension being transmitted over a Transport Layer Security (TLS) version 1.3 handshake.

--- middle

# Introduction

As discussed in SNI Encryption in TLS Through Tunneling {{!I-D.huitema-tls-sni-encryption}}, it is becoming important to protect from observers the name of the server a client is attempting access.
However, Transport Layer Security (TLS) version 1.3 {{!I-D.ietf-tls-tls13}} transmits the Server Name Indication extension (([RFC6066], section 3) unencrypted.

This memo defines the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record and two TLS extensions: the Encrypted SNI Extension, the Semi-Static Key Share Extension, that when being used together provides a way to transmit the server name in an encrypted form. 

## Notational Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

# Protocol Overview

In the proposed scheme, the server operator publishes its X.509 certificate [RFC5280] chain and a semi-static (EC)DH key using the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Record Record.

When a client tries to access the server, it queries the DNS resolver for the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record in addition to the IP address of the server.
The two queries can be issued simultaneously.

Once the client obtains the address of the server and also the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record, the client connects to the server and starts a TLS handshake.
Instead of sending the Server Name Indication extension, the client will send the server name using the Encrypted SNI Extension, which is encrypted using a symmetric key derived from the result of the (EC)DH key exchange, the two (EC)DH keys being the one embedded in the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record and the other included in the KeyShare extension of the ClientHello message.

# TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record

The DNS Resource Record Type is used to convey the server certificate chain and (EC)DH public keys associated to a hostname.

The structure of the record type is:

       struct {
           KeyShareEntry key_share;
           opaque cookie<0..2^16-1>;
       } SemiStaticKeyShareEntry;

       struct {
           CertificateEntry certificate_list<0..2^24-1>;
           SemiStaticKeyShareEntry semi_static_shares<1..2^16-1>;
           CipherSuite cipher_suites<2..2^16-2>;
           SignatureScheme signature_algorithm;
           opaque signature<0..2^16-1>;
       } TLSBootstrapRecord;

key_share
: A (EC)DH public key and its type.

cookie
: An identifier associated to the key_share.
The value is transmitted from the client to the server during the TLS handshake so that the server can identify which key share as been used.

certificate_list
: The certificate chain of the server certificate along with extensions to verify the validity of the certificate (e.g., OCSP Status extensions ([RFC6066], [RFC6961])).

semi_static_shares
: list of key_shares that the server offers to the client

signature
: The signature is a digital signature using the algorithm specified in the signature_algorithm field. The digital signature covering from the beginning of the structure to the end of the signature_algorithm field.

The set of semi-static (EC)DH keys included in the DNS Resource Record MUST be a common value between the server names that are served by the server.
For example, if a server hosts three server names: example.com, example.org, example.net, the keys that are published using the DNS Resource Record will be identical for the three server names.

# Changes to ClientHello

When a client attempts to connect to a server, it at first queries the DNS resolver to obtain the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record as well as the IP address of the server.
The two DNS queries can be issued simultaneously.

Once the client obtains the IP address of the server and also the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record, it MUST verify the certificate chain and the signature of the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource record.
After a successful verification, the client will connect to the server and start a TLS 1.3 handshake, by sending a ClientHello handshake message with the following changes.

* The "key-share" extension MUST include exactly one KeyShareEntry.
The algorithm of the KeyShareEntry MUST be one among the semi-static key shares offered by the server through the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record.
* The "cipher_suite" field MUST include exactly one cipher-suite.
It should be one among the cipher-suites offered by the server through the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record.
* The Server Name Indication Extension MUST NOT be used.
* The Semi-Static Key Share Extension and the EncryptedSNI Extension MUST be used.

A client can use the Cached Information Extension [RFC7924] in hope that the server will try to send the certificates that are identical to the ones that are found in the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record, and that instead of sending the certificate, the server will use the extension to just send the hash values of the certificate. 

## Semi-Static Key Share Extension

The extension identifies the semi-static (EC)DH key that was being selected by the client.

       struct {
           select (Handshake.msg_type) {
               case client_hello:
                   opaque cookie<0..2^16-1>;
               case encrypted_extensions:
                   Empty;
           }
       } SemiStaticKeyShare;

A server MUST abort the handshake with a "unknown-semi-static-key" alert if it find an unknown or an invalid cookie in the extension.
A server MUST send an empty Semi-Static Key Share Extension in the EncryptedExtensions handshake message, when the extension appeared in the ClientHello handshake message.

## Encrypted SNI Extension

The extension contains the Server Name Indication Extension encrypted using a shared key derived from the (EC)DH key exchange.

       struct {
           ServerName server_name;
           opaque padding<0..2^8-1>;
       } PlaintextEncryptedSNI;

       struct {
           select (Handshake.msg_type) {
               case client_hello:
                   opaque encrypted_payload<0..2^16-1>;
               case encrypted_extensions:
                   Empty;
           }
       } EncryptedSNI;

server_name
: the raw (un-encrypted) value of the Server Name Indication Extension

cipher_suite
: The AEAD algorithm and the hash algorithm to encrypted the encrypted_payload

encrypted_payload
: Contains a PlaintextEncryptedSNI structure encrypted using the only cipher-suite specified by the "cipher_suites" field of the ClientHello message.

The key that is being used for protecting the encrypted_payload is calculated as follows by using the HKDF functions [RFC5869], whereas the semi_static_master_key being calculated by applying HKDF-Extract to the result of the (EC)DH key exchange with an empty salt.

       HKDF-Expand-Label(semi_static_master_key, "encrypted-sni", "",
                         Hash.length)

A client MUST pad the PlaintextEncryptedSNI structure so that the length of the server name cannot be observed.

A server MUST abort the handshake with a "decode_error" alert if it sees an Encrypted SNI Extension but not the Semi-Static Key Share Extension.
A server MUST abort the handshake with a "decrypt_error" alert if it fails to decrypt the encrypted SNI. 

Once the server successfully decrypts the EncryptedSNI extension, it will use the value of the contained ServerName extension and continue the handshake.

A server MUST send an empty EncryptedSNI extension using the EncryptedExtension handshake message to indicate that it has seen the extension in ClientHello.

If a client observes an EncryptedExtension handshake message with a Semi-Static Key Share Extension but without a Encrypted SNI extension in response to a ClientHello message containing an Encrypted SNI extension, it MUST abort the handshake by sending a "handshake_failure" alert.
 
# Future Works

We should consider extending HTTP Strict Transport Security [RFC6797] so that the servers can enforce the client the use of the Encrypted SNI extension.

We might want to consider using the semi-static key introduced in this memo for other purposes.
For example, it would be possible to use the key to invoke a 0-RTT handshake even when resumption is impossible.

# Security Considerations

By using the value of the cookie, servers MUST detect and reject the use of outdated TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Records.
Otherwise, an attacker might be able to inject an old record to force the peers to agree on using a key-share or a cipher-suite that has turned out to be vulnerable after the record was published on the authoritative server.

The injection of malformed or outdated TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record can be used as an attack vector to cause denial-of-service attacks, since misuse of such records by a client ends up in a TLS handshake failure.
However, it could be argued that injection of a wrong A record will essentially have the same effect in terms of denial-of-service attacks.
In other words, use of a DNS record to transmit TLS handshake parameters does not make us more prone to attacks.

# IANA Considerations

The TLS ExtensionType Registry will be updated to contain the codepoints for the Semi-Static Key Share Extension Type and the Encrypted SNI Extension type.

The TLS Alert Registry will be updated to contain the "unknown-semi-static-key" alert.
  
The DNS Parameters Registry will be updated to contain the codepoint for the TLS-Bootstrap Resource Record Type.

Commit message:

create an encrypted-extensions bag within ClientHello?

draft-kazuho-protected-sni.md, after:

---
title: TLS Extensions for Protecting SNI
abbrev: Protected SNI
docname: draft-kazuho-protected-sni-latest
date: 2017
category: std

ipr: trust200902
area: General
workgroup:
keyword: Internet-Draft

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, docindent, sortrefs, symrefs, strict, compact, comments, inline]

author:
 -
    ins: K. Oku
    name: Kazuho Oku
    email: kazuhooku@gmail.com

normative:
  RFC1035:
  RFC2119:
  RFC5280:
  RFC5869:
  RFC6066:

informative:
  RFC6797:
  RFC6961:
  RFC7924:

--- abstract

This memo introduces TLS extensions and a DNS Resource Record Type that can be used to protect attackers from obtaining the value of the Server Name Indication extension being transmitted over a Transport Layer Security (TLS) version 1.3 handshake.

--- middle

# Introduction

As discussed in SNI Encryption in TLS Through Tunneling {{!I-D.huitema-tls-sni-encryption}}, it is becoming important to protect from observers the name of the server a client is attempting access.
However, Transport Layer Security (TLS) version 1.3 {{!I-D.ietf-tls-tls13}} transmits the Server Name Indication extension (([RFC6066], section 3) unencrypted.

This memo defines the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record and two TLS extensions: the Encrypted SNI Extension, the Semi-Static Key Share Extension, that when being used together provides a way to transmit the server name in an encrypted form. 

## Notational Conventions

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

# Protocol Overview

In the proposed scheme, the server operator publishes its X.509 certificate [RFC5280] chain and a semi-static (EC)DH key using the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Record Record.

When a client tries to access the server, it queries the DNS resolver for the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record in addition to the IP address of the server.
The two queries can be issued simultaneously.

Once the client obtains the address of the server and also the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record, the client connects to the server and starts a TLS handshake.
Instead of sending the Server Name Indication extension, the client will send the server name using the Encrypted SNI Extension, which is encrypted using a symmetric key derived from the result of the (EC)DH key exchange, the two (EC)DH keys being the one embedded in the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record and the other included in the KeyShare extension of the ClientHello message.

# TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record

The DNS Resource Record Type is used to convey the server certificate chain and (EC)DH public keys associated to a hostname.

The structure of the record type is:

       struct {
           KeyShareEntry key_share;
           opaque cookie<0..2^16-1>;
       } SemiStaticKeyShareEntry;

       struct {
           CertificateEntry certificate_list<0..2^24-1>;
           SemiStaticKeyShareEntry semi_static_shares<1..2^16-1>;
           CipherSuite cipher_suites<2..2^16-2>;
           SignatureScheme signature_algorithm;
           opaque signature<0..2^16-1>;
       } TLSBootstrapRecord;

key_share
: A (EC)DH public key and its type.

cookie
: An identifier associated to the key_share.
The value is transmitted from the client to the server during the TLS handshake so that the server can identify which key share as been used.

certificate_list
: The certificate chain of the server certificate along with extensions to verify the validity of the certificate (e.g., OCSP Status extensions ([RFC6066], [RFC6961])).

semi_static_shares
: list of key_shares that the server offers to the client

signature
: The signature is a digital signature using the algorithm specified in the signature_algorithm field. The digital signature covering from the beginning of the structure to the end of the signature_algorithm field.

The set of semi-static (EC)DH keys included in the DNS Resource Record MUST be a common value between the server names that are served by the server.
For example, if a server hosts three server names: example.com, example.org, example.net, the keys that are published using the DNS Resource Record will be identical for the three server names.

# Changes to ClientHello

When a client attempts to connect to a server, it at first queries the DNS resolver to obtain the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record as well as the IP address of the server.
The two DNS queries can be issued simultaneously.

Once the client obtains the IP address of the server and also the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record, it MUST verify the certificate chain and the signature of the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource record.
After a successful verification, the client will connect to the server and start a TLS 1.3 handshake, by sending a ClientHello handshake message with the following changes.

* The "key-share" extension MUST include exactly one KeyShareEntry.
The algorithm of the KeyShareEntry MUST be one among the semi-static key shares offered by the server through the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record.
* The "cipher_suite" field MUST include exactly one cipher-suite.
It should be one among the cipher-suites offered by the server through the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record.
* The Server Name Indication Extension MUST NOT be used.
* The Semi-Static Key Share Extension and the EncryptedSNI Extension MUST be used.

A client can use the Cached Information Extension [RFC7924] in hope that the server will try to send the certificates that are identical to the ones that are found in the TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record, and that instead of sending the certificate, the server will use the extension to just send the hash values of the certificate. 

## Semi-Static Key Share Extension

The extension identifies the semi-static (EC)DH key that was being selected by the client.

       struct {
           select (Handshake.msg_type) {
               case client_hello:
                   opaque cookie<0..2^16-1>;
               case encrypted_extensions:
                   Empty;
           }
       } SemiStaticKeyShare;

A server MUST abort the handshake with a "unknown-semi-static-key" alert if it find an unknown or an invalid cookie in the extension.
A server MUST send an empty Semi-Static Key Share Extension in the EncryptedExtensions handshake message, when the extension appeared in the ClientHello handshake message.

## Encrypted SNI Extension

The extension contains the Server Name Indication Extension encrypted using a shared key derived from the (EC)DH key exchange.

       struct {
           ServerName server_name;
           opaque padding<0..2^8-1>;
       } PlaintextEncryptedSNI;

       struct {
           select (Handshake.msg_type) {
               case client_hello:
                   opaque encrypted_payload<0..2^16-1>;
               case encrypted_extensions:
                   Empty;
           }
       } EncryptedSNI;

server_name
: the raw (un-encrypted) value of the Server Name Indication Extension

cipher_suite
: The AEAD algorithm and the hash algorithm to encrypted the encrypted_payload

encrypted_payload
: Contains a PlaintextEncryptedSNI structure encrypted using the only cipher-suite specified by the "cipher_suites" field of the ClientHello message.

The key that is being used for protecting the encrypted_payload is calculated as follows by using the HKDF functions [RFC5869], whereas the semi_static_master_key being calculated by applying HKDF-Extract to the result of the (EC)DH key exchange with an empty salt.

       HKDF-Expand-Label(semi_static_master_key, "encrypted-sni", "",
                         Hash.length)

A client MUST pad the PlaintextEncryptedSNI structure so that the length of the server name cannot be observed.

A server MUST abort the handshake with a "decode_error" alert if it sees an Encrypted SNI Extension but not the Semi-Static Key Share Extension.
A server MUST abort the handshake with a "decrypt_error" alert if it fails to decrypt the encrypted SNI. 

Once the server successfully decrypts the EncryptedSNI extension, it will use the value of the contained ServerName extension and continue the handshake.

A server MUST send an empty EncryptedSNI extension using the EncryptedExtension handshake message to indicate that it has seen the extension in ClientHello.

If a client observes an EncryptedExtension handshake message with a Semi-Static Key Share Extension but without a Encrypted SNI extension in response to a ClientHello message containing an Encrypted SNI extension, it MUST abort the handshake by sending a "handshake_failure" alert.
 
# Future Works

We should consider extending HTTP Strict Transport Security [RFC6797] so that the servers can enforce the client the use of the Encrypted SNI extension.

We might want to refactor the proposed method to send an arbitrary number of extensions protected within a ClientHello message, rather than just encrypting the Server Name Indication extension.

We might want to consider using the semi-static key introduced in this memo for other purposes.
For example, it would be possible to use the key to invoke a 0-RTT handshake even when resumption is impossible.

# Security Considerations

By using the value of the cookie, servers MUST detect and reject the use of outdated TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Records.
Otherwise, an attacker might be able to inject an old record to force the peers to agree on using a key-share or a cipher-suite that has turned out to be vulnerable after the record was published on the authoritative server.

The injection of malformed or outdated TLS-Bootstrap DNS Resource Record can be used as an attack vector to cause denial-of-service attacks, since misuse of such records by a client ends up in a TLS handshake failure.
However, it could be argued that injection of a wrong A record will essentially have the same effect in terms of denial-of-service attacks.
In other words, use of a DNS record to transmit TLS handshake parameters does not make us more prone to attacks.

# IANA Considerations

The TLS ExtensionType Registry will be updated to contain the codepoints for the Semi-Static Key Share Extension Type and the Encrypted SNI Extension type.

The TLS Alert Registry will be updated to contain the "unknown-semi-static-key" alert.
  
The DNS Parameters Registry will be updated to contain the codepoint for the TLS-Bootstrap Resource Record Type.
